docs/admin-guide/admin-getting-started.md, before:

# Getting Started with zot Administration

> :point_right: This document helps you to deploy an appropriate zot image or to build zot if desired.
> 
> After deploying zot, proceed to [Configuring zot](admin-configuration.md) to choose and configure the features you need.

## Installing zot

### How to get zot

The zot project is hosted on GitHub at
[project-zot](https://github.com/project-zot/zot). From GitHub, you can
download zot executable binary images or full source code.

<a name="supported-platforms-zot"></a>

#### Supported platforms

zot is officially supported on Linux and Apple MacOS
platforms, using Intel or ARM processors. However, development should be
possible on any platform that supports the `golang` toolchain.

| OS     | ARCH  | Platform                            |
|--------|-------|-------------------------------------|
| linux  | amd64 | Intel-based Linux servers           |
| linux  | arm64 | ARM-based servers and Raspberry Pi4 |
| darwin | amd64 | Intel-based MacOS                   |
| darwin | arm64 | ARM-based MacOS                     |


#### About binary images

Executable binary zot images are available for multiple platforms and
architectures and with full or minimal implementations.

Refer to [*Released Images for zot*](../general/releases.md) for
information about available zot images along with information about
image variations, image locations, and image naming formats.

#### Deployment methods

Several options exist for deploying zot:

-   You can launch a zot binary as a container service using
    a container management tool such as Podman, Docker, or Helm.

-   You can launch zot as a host-level service by downloading
    a binary image and running it as a systemd service.

-   You can copy or clone the full zot source code and build
    an image with custom build flags.

### Deploying a zot binary image

Executable binary images for supported server platforms and
architectures are available from the [zot package
repository](https://github.com/orgs/project-zot/packages?repo_name=zot)
in GitHub.

You can download the appropriate binary image and run it directly on
your server, or you can use a container management tool such as Podman,
runc, Helm, or Docker to fetch and deploy the image in a container on
your server.

> :bulb: For convenience, you can rename the binary image file to simply `zot`.


#### Example: Deploying with a container manager

Using a container manager such as Podman, runc, Helm, or Docker, you can
install a zot binary image, as in the following examples.

**Using podman**

    podman run -p 5000:5000 ghcr.io/project-zot/zot-linux-amd64:latest

    podman run -p 5000:5000 ghcr.io/project-zot/zot-linux-amd64-minimal:latest

<details>
  <summary markdown="span">Click here to view an example of deploying using podman.</summary>

<p align="center">
  <img width="600" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/project-zot/zot/710395377747b93ac11b7d1304cb2ab1059d34f6/demos/podman-getting-started.svg"></img>
</p>

</details>

**Using docker**

    docker run -p 5000:5000 ghcr.io/project-zot/zot-linux-amd64:latest

Each of these example commands pulls a zot binary image from
the GitHub Container Registry (ghcr.io) and launches a zot
image registry at <http://localhost:5000>.

<details>
  <summary markdown="span">Click here to view an example of deploying using docker.</summary>

<p align="center">
  <img width="600" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/project-zot/zot/710395377747b93ac11b7d1304cb2ab1059d34f6/demos/docker-getting-started.svg"></img>
</p>

</details>

### Building zot from source

#### Prerequisites

##### Install golang (1.17+)

The zot project requires `golang 1.17` or newer. You can follow [these
instructions](https://go.dev/learn/) to install the `golang` toolchain.
After installation, make sure that the `path` environment variable or
your IDE can find the toolchain.

#### Building an executable binary from source

Download or clone the full zot project from GitHub at
[project-zot](https://github.com/project-zot/zot). To clone the
zot project from GitHub, use this command:

    git clone https://github.com/project-zot/zot.git

To build zot, execute the `make` command in the
`zot` directory using the following general syntax:

`make OS=os ARCH=architecture {binary | binary-minimal}`


> -   The operating system and architecture options are listed in the
    [Supported platforms and
    architectures](#supported-platforms-zot)
    table. If an option is not specified, the defaults are `linux` and
    `amd64`.
>
> -   The `binary` option builds the full zot binary image with
    all extensions.
>
> -   The `binary-minimal` option builds the minimal distribution-spec
    conformant zot binary image without extensions, reducing
    the attack surface.


For example, to build a zot image with extensions for an
Intel-based linux server, use the following command:

    make OS=linux ARCH=amd64 binary

The `make` command builds an executable image in the `zot/bin`
directory. The original filename of the zot executable image
will indicate the build options. For example, the filename of an
Intel-based linux minimal image is `zot-linux-amd64-minimal`.

> :bulb:
> For convenience, you can rename the binary image file to simply `zot`.


#### Building a zot container image from source

**with Stacker**

Using the settings in stacker.yaml, you can build a container image that
runs the latest zot by running the following command:

    make binary-stacker

**with Docker**

A sample Dockerfile is provided on the [zot project
page](https://github.com/project-zot/zot/tree/main/build/Dockerfile) in
GitHub. You can edit the sample file with your specific values, such as
the desired operating system, hardware architecture, and full or minimal
build, as in this example:

    ARG OS=linux
    ARG ARCH=amd64

    RUN make COMMIT=$COMMIT OS=$OS ARCH=$ARCH clean binary-minimal

Using your edited Dockerfile, you can build a container image that runs
the latest zot by running the following command:

    make image

#### Deploying the container image

Deploy the image using your container manager, such as Podman, runc,
Helm, or Docker, as in these examples:

**with Podman**

    podman run --rm -it -p 5000:5000 -v $(pwd)/registry:/var/lib/registry zot:latest

**with Docker**

    docker run --rm -it -p 5000:5000 -v $(pwd)/registry:/var/lib/registry zot:latest

A container image built with the sample Dockerfile and deployed with the
example command results in a running registry at
`http://localhost:5000`. Registry content is stored at `.registry`,
which is bind mounted to `/var/lib/registry` in the container. By
default, auth is disabled. As part of the build, a YAML configuration
file is created at `/etc/zot/config.yml` in the container.

You can override the configuration file with custom configuration
settings in the deployment command and in a local configuration file as
shown in this example:

    podman run --rm -p 8080:8080 \
      -v $(pwd)/custom-config.yml:/etc/zot/config.yml \
      -v $(pwd)/registry:/tmp/zot \
      zot:latest

This command causes the registry to listen on port 8080 and to use
`/tmp/zot` for content storage.

### Additional recommended steps

We recommend that, when deploying zot, you also install the command line ([zli](../user-guides/zli.md)) and benchmarking ([zb](../articles/benchmarking-with-zb.md)) packages.

### Launching zot

The zot service is initiated with the `zot serve` command followed by the name of a configuration file, as in this example:

`zot serve config.yml`

> :bulb:
> For convenience, you can rename the binary image file to simply `zot`.The instructions and examples in this guide use `zot` as the name of the zot executable file and do not include the path to the executable file.


## Next Steps

### Configuring zot

You configure zot primarily through adding and modifying settings in the zot configuration file. The configuration file is a JSON or YAML file that contains all configuration settings for zot functions. 

When you first build zot or deploy an image or container from the distribution, a basic configuration file `config.json` is created. You can modify the initial file or you can create a new file.

Follow the instructions in [Configuring zot](admin-configuration.md), to compose a configuration file with the settings and features you require for your zot registry server.

Commit message:

docs: added FreeBSD binaries support (#114)
Signed-off-by: mbshields <mshields@alum.mit.edu>

docs/admin-guide/admin-getting-started.md, after:

# Getting Started with zot Administration

> :point_right: This document helps you to deploy an appropriate zot image or to build zot if desired.
> 
> After deploying zot, proceed to [Configuring zot](admin-configuration.md) to choose and configure the features you need.

## Installing zot

### How to get zot

The zot project is hosted on GitHub at
[project-zot](https://github.com/project-zot/zot). From GitHub, you can
download zot executable binary images or full source code.

<a name="supported-platforms-zot"></a>

#### Supported platforms

zot is officially supported on Linux and Apple MacOS
platforms, using Intel or ARM processors. However, development should be
possible on any platform that supports the `golang` toolchain.

| OS     | ARCH  | Platform                            |
|--------|-------|-------------------------------------|
| linux  | amd64 | Intel-based Linux servers           |
| linux  | arm64 | ARM-based servers and Raspberry Pi4 |
| darwin | amd64 | Intel-based MacOS                   |
| darwin | arm64 | ARM-based MacOS                     |
| freebsd | amd64 | Intel-based FreeBSD<sup>*</sup>    |
| freebsd | arm64 | ARM-based FreeBSD<sup>*</sup>      |

<sup>*</sup> **NOTE:** While binary images are available for FreeBSD, building container images is not supported at this time.

#### About binary images

Executable binary zot images are available for multiple platforms and
architectures and with full or minimal implementations.

Refer to [*Released Images for zot*](../general/releases.md) for
information about available zot images along with information about
image variations, image locations, and image naming formats.

#### Deployment methods

Several options exist for deploying zot:

-   You can launch a zot binary as a container service using
    a container management tool such as Podman, Docker, or Helm.

-   You can launch zot as a host-level service by downloading
    a binary image and running it as a systemd service.

-   You can copy or clone the full zot source code and build
    an image with custom build flags.

### Deploying a zot binary image

Executable binary images for supported server platforms and
architectures are available from the [zot package
repository](https://github.com/orgs/project-zot/packages?repo_name=zot)
in GitHub.

You can download the appropriate binary image and run it directly on
your server, or you can use a container management tool such as Podman,
runc, Helm, or Docker to fetch and deploy the image in a container on
your server.

> :bulb: For convenience, you can rename the binary image file to simply `zot`.


#### Example: Deploying with a container manager

Using a container manager such as Podman, runc, Helm, or Docker, you can
install a zot binary image, as in the following examples.

**Using podman**

    podman run -p 5000:5000 ghcr.io/project-zot/zot-linux-amd64:latest

    podman run -p 5000:5000 ghcr.io/project-zot/zot-linux-amd64-minimal:latest

<details>
  <summary markdown="span">Click here to view an example of deploying using podman.</summary>

<p align="center">
  <img width="600" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/project-zot/zot/710395377747b93ac11b7d1304cb2ab1059d34f6/demos/podman-getting-started.svg"></img>
</p>

</details>

**Using docker**

    docker run -p 5000:5000 ghcr.io/project-zot/zot-linux-amd64:latest

Each of these example commands pulls a zot binary image from
the GitHub Container Registry (ghcr.io) and launches a zot
image registry at <http://localhost:5000>.

<details>
  <summary markdown="span">Click here to view an example of deploying using docker.</summary>

<p align="center">
  <img width="600" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/project-zot/zot/710395377747b93ac11b7d1304cb2ab1059d34f6/demos/docker-getting-started.svg"></img>
</p>

</details>

### Building zot from source

#### Prerequisites

##### Install golang (1.17+)

The zot project requires `golang 1.17` or newer. You can follow [these
instructions](https://go.dev/learn/) to install the `golang` toolchain.
After installation, make sure that the `path` environment variable or
your IDE can find the toolchain.

#### Building an executable binary from source

Download or clone the full zot project from GitHub at
[project-zot](https://github.com/project-zot/zot). To clone the
zot project from GitHub, use this command:

    git clone https://github.com/project-zot/zot.git

To build zot, execute the `make` command in the
`zot` directory using the following general syntax:

`make OS=os ARCH=architecture {binary | binary-minimal}`


> -   The operating system and architecture options are listed in the
    [Supported platforms and
    architectures](#supported-platforms-zot)
    table. If an option is not specified, the defaults are `linux` and
    `amd64`.
>
> -   The `binary` option builds the full zot binary image with
    all extensions.
>
> -   The `binary-minimal` option builds the minimal distribution-spec
    conformant zot binary image without extensions, reducing
    the attack surface.


For example, to build a zot image with extensions for an
Intel-based linux server, use the following command:

    make OS=linux ARCH=amd64 binary

The `make` command builds an executable image in the `zot/bin`
directory. The original filename of the zot executable image
will indicate the build options. For example, the filename of an
Intel-based linux minimal image is `zot-linux-amd64-minimal`.

> :bulb:
> For convenience, you can rename the binary image file to simply `zot`.


#### Building a zot container image from source

**with Stacker**

Using the settings in stacker.yaml, you can build a container image that
runs the latest zot by running the following command:

    make binary-stacker

**with Docker**

A sample Dockerfile is provided on the [zot project
page](https://github.com/project-zot/zot/tree/main/build/Dockerfile) in
GitHub. You can edit the sample file with your specific values, such as
the desired operating system, hardware architecture, and full or minimal
build, as in this example:

    ARG OS=linux
    ARG ARCH=amd64

    RUN make COMMIT=$COMMIT OS=$OS ARCH=$ARCH clean binary-minimal

Using your edited Dockerfile, you can build a container image that runs
the latest zot by running the following command:

    make image

#### Deploying the container image

Deploy the image using your container manager, such as Podman, runc,
Helm, or Docker, as in these examples:

**with Podman**

    podman run --rm -it -p 5000:5000 -v $(pwd)/registry:/var/lib/registry zot:latest

**with Docker**

    docker run --rm -it -p 5000:5000 -v $(pwd)/registry:/var/lib/registry zot:latest

A container image built with the sample Dockerfile and deployed with the
example command results in a running registry at
`http://localhost:5000`. Registry content is stored at `.registry`,
which is bind mounted to `/var/lib/registry` in the container. By
default, auth is disabled. As part of the build, a YAML configuration
file is created at `/etc/zot/config.yml` in the container.

You can override the configuration file with custom configuration
settings in the deployment command and in a local configuration file as
shown in this example:

    podman run --rm -p 8080:8080 \
      -v $(pwd)/custom-config.yml:/etc/zot/config.yml \
      -v $(pwd)/registry:/tmp/zot \
      zot:latest

This command causes the registry to listen on port 8080 and to use
`/tmp/zot` for content storage.

### Additional recommended steps

We recommend that, when deploying zot, you also install the command line ([zli](../user-guides/zli.md)) and benchmarking ([zb](../articles/benchmarking-with-zb.md)) packages.

### Launching zot

The zot service is initiated with the `zot serve` command followed by the name of a configuration file, as in this example:

`zot serve config.yml`

> :bulb:
> For convenience, you can rename the binary image file to simply `zot`.The instructions and examples in this guide use `zot` as the name of the zot executable file and do not include the path to the executable file.


## Next Steps

### Configuring zot

You configure zot primarily through adding and modifying settings in the zot configuration file. The configuration file is a JSON or YAML file that contains all configuration settings for zot functions. 

When you first build zot or deploy an image or container from the distribution, a basic configuration file `config.json` is created. You can modify the initial file or you can create a new file.

Follow the instructions in [Configuring zot](admin-configuration.md), to compose a configuration file with the settings and features you require for your zot registry server.
