docs/articles/clustering.md, before:

# zot Clustering

> :point_right: High availability of the zot registry is supported by the following features:
>
> -   Stateless zot instances to simplify scale out
> -   Bare-metal and Kubernetes deployments


To ensure high-availability of the registry, zot supports a clustering
scheme with stateless zot instances/replicas fronted by a loadbalancer
and a shared remote backend storage. This scheme allows the registry
service to remain available even if a few replicas fail or become
unavailable. Loadbalancing across many zot replicas can also increase
aggregate network throughput.

![504569](../assets/images/504569.jpg){width="400"}

Clustering is supported in both bare-metal and Kubernetes environments.
> :pencil2:
> The remote backend storage must be [S3 API-compatible](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/Welcome.html).


## Bare-metal deployment

### Prerequisites

-   A highly-available loadbalancer such as `HAProxy` configured to direct traffic to zot replicas.

-   Multiple zot replicas as `systemd` services hosted on multiple hosts or VMs.

-   AWS S3 API-compatible remote backend storage.

## Kubernetes deployment

### Prerequisites

-   A zot Kubernetes
    [Deployment](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/)
    with required number of replicas.

-   AWS S3 API-compatible remote backend storage.

-   A zot Kubernetes
    [Service](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/).

-   A zot Kubernetes [Ingress
    Gateway](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress/)
    if the service needs to be exposed outside.

## Implementing stateless zot

zot maintains two types of durable state:

-   the actual image data itself

-   the image metadata in the registry’s cache

In a stateless clustering scheme, the image data is stored in the remote
storage backend and the registry cache is disabled by turning off both
deduplication and garbage collection.

## Ecosystem tools

The [OCI Distribution
Specification](https://github.com/opencontainers/distribution-spec)
imposes certain rules about the HTTP URI paths to which various
ecosystem tools must conform. Consider these rules when setting the HTTP
prefixes during loadbalancing and ingress gateway configuration.

## Examples

zot supports clustering by using multiple stateless zot replicas with shared S3 storage and an `HAProxy` (with sticky session) load-balancing traffic to the replicas.

### YAML configuration

<details>
  <summary markdown="span">Click here to view a sample haproxy configuration.</summary>

```yaml

global
        log /dev/log    local0
        log /dev/log    local1 notice
        chroot /var/lib/haproxy
        maxconn 2000
        stats socket /run/haproxy/admin.sock mode 660 level admin expose-fd listeners
        stats timeout 30s
        user haproxy
        group haproxy
        daemon

        # Default SSL material locations
        ca-base /etc/ssl/certs
        crt-base /etc/ssl/private

        # See: https://ssl-config.mozilla.org/#server=haproxy&server-version=2.0.3&config=intermediate
        ssl-default-bind-ciphers ECDHE-ECDSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256:ECDHE-RSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256:ECDHE-ECDSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384:ECDHE-RSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384:ECDHE-ECDSA-CHACHA20-POLY1305:ECDHE-RSA-CHACHA20-POLY1305:DHE-RSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256:DHE-RSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384
        ssl-default-bind-ciphersuites TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256:TLS_AES_256_GCM_SHA384:TLS_CHACHA20_POLY1305_SHA256
        ssl-default-bind-options ssl-min-ver TLSv1.2 no-tls-tickets

defaults
        log     global
        mode    http
        option  httplog
        option  dontlognull
        timeout connect 5000
        timeout client  50000
        timeout server  50000
        errorfile 400 /etc/haproxy/errors/400.http
        errorfile 403 /etc/haproxy/errors/403.http
        errorfile 408 /etc/haproxy/errors/408.http
        errorfile 500 /etc/haproxy/errors/500.http
        errorfile 502 /etc/haproxy/errors/502.http
        errorfile 503 /etc/haproxy/errors/503.http
        errorfile 504 /etc/haproxy/errors/504.http

frontend zot
    bind *:8080
    mode http
    default_backend zot-cluster

backend zot-cluster
    mode http
    balance roundrobin
    server zot1 127.0.0.1:8081 check
    server zot2 127.0.0.1:8082 check
    server zot3 127.0.0.1:8083 check

```

</details>

### zot S3 configuration

<details>
  <summary markdown="span">Click here to view a sample zot configuration for S3.</summary>

```json

{
    "distSpecVersion": "1.0.1-dev",
    "storage": {
        "rootDirectory": "/tmp/zot",
        "dedupe": true,
        "storageDriver": {
            "name": "s3",
            "rootdirectory": "/zot",
            "region": "us-east-2",
            "bucket": "zot-storage",
            "secure": true,
            "skipverify": false
        },
        "cacheDriver": {
            "name": "dynamodb",
            "endpoint": "http://localhost:4566",
            "region": "us-east-2",
            "tableName": "MainTable"
        }
    },
    "http": {
        "address": "127.0.0.1",
        "port": "8080"
    },
    "log": {
        "level": "debug"
    }
}

```
</details>

Commit message:

docs: add Scaling the cluster to clustering article
Signed-off-by: mbshields <mshields@alum.mit.edu>

docs/articles/clustering.md, after:

# zot Clustering

> :point_right: High availability of the zot registry is supported by the following features:
>
> -   Stateless zot instances to simplify scale out
> -   Bare-metal and Kubernetes deployments


To ensure high-availability of the registry, zot supports a clustering
scheme with stateless zot instances/replicas fronted by a loadbalancer
and a shared remote backend storage. This scheme allows the registry
service to remain available even if a few replicas fail or become
unavailable. Loadbalancing across many zot replicas can also increase
aggregate network throughput.

![504569](../assets/images/504569.jpg){width="500"}<figcaption><a name="figure1"></a>Figure 1:  a zot cluster with load balancing</figcaption>


Clustering is supported in both bare-metal and Kubernetes environments.
> :pencil2:
> The remote backend storage must be [S3 API-compatible](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/Welcome.html).


## Bare-metal deployment

### Prerequisites

-   A highly-available loadbalancer such as `HAProxy` configured to direct traffic to zot replicas.

-   Multiple zot replicas as `systemd` services hosted on multiple hosts or VMs.

-   AWS S3 API-compatible remote backend storage.

## Kubernetes deployment

### Prerequisites

-   A zot Kubernetes
    [Deployment](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/)
    with required number of replicas.

-   AWS S3 API-compatible remote backend storage.

-   A zot Kubernetes
    [Service](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/).

-   A zot Kubernetes [Ingress
    Gateway](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress/)
    if the service needs to be exposed outside.

## Implementing stateless zot

zot maintains two types of durable state:

-   the actual image data itself

-   the image metadata in the registry’s cache

In a stateless clustering scheme, the image data is stored in the remote
storage backend and the registry cache is disabled by turning off both
deduplication and garbage collection.

## Ecosystem tools

The [OCI Distribution
Specification](https://github.com/opencontainers/distribution-spec)
imposes certain rules about the HTTP URI paths to which various
ecosystem tools must conform. Consider these rules when setting the HTTP
prefixes during loadbalancing and ingress gateway configuration.

## Examples

zot supports clustering by using multiple stateless zot replicas with shared S3 storage and an `HAProxy` (with sticky session) load-balancing traffic to the replicas.

### YAML configuration

<details>
  <summary markdown="span">Click here to view a sample haproxy configuration.</summary>

```yaml

global
        log /dev/log    local0
        log /dev/log    local1 notice
        chroot /var/lib/haproxy
        maxconn 2000
        stats socket /run/haproxy/admin.sock mode 660 level admin expose-fd listeners
        stats timeout 30s
        user haproxy
        group haproxy
        daemon

        # Default SSL material locations
        ca-base /etc/ssl/certs
        crt-base /etc/ssl/private

        # See: https://ssl-config.mozilla.org/#server=haproxy&server-version=2.0.3&config=intermediate
        ssl-default-bind-ciphers ECDHE-ECDSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256:ECDHE-RSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256:ECDHE-ECDSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384:ECDHE-RSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384:ECDHE-ECDSA-CHACHA20-POLY1305:ECDHE-RSA-CHACHA20-POLY1305:DHE-RSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256:DHE-RSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384
        ssl-default-bind-ciphersuites TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256:TLS_AES_256_GCM_SHA384:TLS_CHACHA20_POLY1305_SHA256
        ssl-default-bind-options ssl-min-ver TLSv1.2 no-tls-tickets

defaults
        log     global
        mode    http
        option  httplog
        option  dontlognull
        timeout connect 5000
        timeout client  50000
        timeout server  50000
        errorfile 400 /etc/haproxy/errors/400.http
        errorfile 403 /etc/haproxy/errors/403.http
        errorfile 408 /etc/haproxy/errors/408.http
        errorfile 500 /etc/haproxy/errors/500.http
        errorfile 502 /etc/haproxy/errors/502.http
        errorfile 503 /etc/haproxy/errors/503.http
        errorfile 504 /etc/haproxy/errors/504.http

frontend zot
    bind *:8080
    mode http
    default_backend zot-cluster

backend zot-cluster
    mode http
    balance roundrobin
    server zot1 127.0.0.1:8081 check
    server zot2 127.0.0.1:8082 check
    server zot3 127.0.0.1:8083 check

```

</details>

### zot S3 configuration

<details>
  <summary markdown="span">Click here to view a sample zot configuration for S3.</summary>

```json

{
    "distSpecVersion": "1.0.1-dev",
    "storage": {
        "rootDirectory": "/tmp/zot",
        "dedupe": true,
        "storageDriver": {
            "name": "s3",
            "rootdirectory": "/zot",
            "region": "us-east-2",
            "bucket": "zot-storage",
            "secure": true,
            "skipverify": false
        },
        "cacheDriver": {
            "name": "dynamodb",
            "endpoint": "http://localhost:4566",
            "region": "us-east-2",
            "tableName": "MainTable"
        }
    },
    "http": {
        "address": "127.0.0.1",
        "port": "8080"
    },
    "log": {
        "level": "debug"
    }
}

```
</details>

## Scaling the cluster

An existing zot cluster (see [Figure 1](#figure1)) can easily be expanded with no programming of the load balancer other than adding the IP addresses of the new zot servers.

For easy scaling, the following conditions must be met:

- All zot servers in the cluster use remote storage at a single shared S3 backend. There is no local cacheing in the zot servers.
- Each repo is served by one zot server, and that server is solely responsible for serving all images of that repo. 
- A repo in storage can be written to only by the zot server associated with that repo.
- The URI format sent to the load balancer must be /v2/<repo\>/<manifest\>:<tag\>

The load balancer does not need to know which zot server serves which repo. When the load balancer receives an image request, it sends the request to any zot server in the cluster. The receiving server hashes the repo path and consults a hash table in storage to determine which server is responsible for the repo. The receiving server then proxies for the responsible server, obtaining the requested image and returning it to the requestor.
