docs/articles/storage.md, before:

# Storage Planning with zot

> :point_right: zot supports the following features to provide OCI standards-based, vendor-agnostic image storage:
>
> -   Local and remote file storage
> -   Inline deduplication and garbage collection
> -   Data scrubbing in background

## Storage model

Data handling in zot revolves around two main principles: that data and APIs on the wire conform to the OCI Distribution Specification and that data on the disk conforms to the OCI Image Layout Specification. As a result, any client that is compliant with the Distribution Specification can read from or write to a zot registry. Furthermore, the actual storage is simply an OCI Image Layout. With only these two specification documents in hand, the entire data flow inside can be easily understood.

> :pencil2:
> zot does not implement, support, or require any vendor-specific protocols, including that of Docker.

### Hosting an OCI image layout

Because zot supports the OCI image layout, it can readily host and serve any directories holding a valid OCI image layout even when those directories have been created elsewhere. This property of zot is suitable for use cases in which container images are independently built, stored, and transferred, but later need to be served over the network.

## Storage features 

Exposing flexibility in storage capabilities is a key tenet for catering to the requirements of varied environments ranging from cloud to on-premises to IoT.

#### Commit

Most modern filesystems buffer and flush RAM data to disk after a delay. The purpose of this function is to improve performance at the cost of higher disk memory usage. In embedded devices such as Raspberry Pi, for example, where RAM may be very limited and at a premium, it is desirable to flush data to disk more frequently. The zot storage configuration exposes an option called `commit` which, when enabled, causes data writes to be committed to disk immediately. This option is disabled by default.

#### Deduplication

Deduplication is a storage space saving feature wherein only a single copy of specific content is maintained on disk while many different image manifests may hold references to that same content. The deduplication option (`dedupe`) is also available for supported cloud storage backends.

#### Garbage collection

After an image is deleted by deleting an image manifest, the corresponding blobs can be purged to free up space. However, since Distribution Specification APIs are not transactional between blob and manifest lifecycle, care must be taken so as not to put the storage in an inconsistent state. Garbage collection in zot is an inline feature meaning that it is **not** necessary to take the registry offline. The zot configuration model allows for enabling and disabling garbage collection (`gc`). The model also allows the configuration of a tunable delay (`gcDelay`), which can be set depending on client network speeds and the size of blobs.

#### Scrub

The `scrub` function, available as an *extension*, makes it possible to ascertain data validity by computing hashes on blobs periodically and continuously so that any bit rot is caught and reported early.

## Storage backends

The following types of storage backends are supported.

### Local filesystem

zot can store and serve files from one or more local directories. A minimum of one root directory is required for local hosting, but additional hosted directories can be added. When accessed by HTTP APIs, all directories can appear as a single data store.

> :pencil2:
> Remote filesystems that are mounted and accessible locally such as `NFS` or `fuse` are treated as local filesystems.


### Remote filesystem

zot can also store data remotely in the cloud, using the storage APIs of the cloud service. Currently, zot supports only the AWS s3 storage service.

#### Example: configuration for remote (s3) storage

<details>
  <summary markdown="span">Click here to view a sample zot configuration for remote storage.</summary>

```json

{
    "distSpecVersion": "1.0.1-dev",
    "storage": {
        "rootDirectory": "/tmp/zot",
        "dedupe": true,
        "storageDriver": {
            "name": "s3",
            "rootdirectory": "/zot",
            "region": "us-east-2",
            "bucket": "zot-storage",
            "secure": true,
            "skipverify": false
        },
        "cacheDriver": {
            "name": "dynamodb",
            "endpoint": "http://localhost:4566",
            "region": "us-east-2",
            "tableName": "MainTable"
        },
    },
    "http": {
        "address": "127.0.0.1",
        "port": "8080"
    },
    "log": {
        "level": "debug"
    }
}

```
</details>


## Configuring zot storage

Filesystem storage is configured with the `storage` attribute in the zot configuration file, as shown in the following example.

``` json
    "storage":{
        "rootDirectory":"/tmp/zot",
        "commit": true,
        "dedupe": true,
        "gc": true,
        "gcDelay": "1h",
        "gcInterval": "24h"
    }
```

### Configurable attributes


The following table lists the attributes of the `storage` configuration.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 75%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th style="text-align: left;">Attribute</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">Description</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><code>rootDirectory</code></p></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p>Location of the images stored in the
server file system.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><code>commit</code></p></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p>For faster performance, data written by
zot is retained in memory before being periodically committed
to disk by the operating system. To eliminate this retention time and
cause data to be written to disk immediately, set to <code>true</code>.
This prevents data loss but reduces performance.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><code>dedupe</code></p></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p>If the server filesystem supports hard
links, you can optimize storage space by enabling inline deduplication
of layers and blobs that are shared among multiple container images.
Deduplication is enabled by default. Set to <code>false</code> to
disable deduplication.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><code>gc</code></p></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p>When an image is deleted, either by tag
or by reference, orphaned blobs can lead to wasted storage. Garbage
collection (gc) is enabled by default to reclaim this space. Set to
<code>false</code> to disable garbage collection.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><code>gcDelay</code></p></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p>(Optional) If garbage collection is
enabled, causes it to run once after the specified delay time. The
default is 1 hour. Requires the <code>gc</code> attribute to be
<code>true</code>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><code>gcInterval</code></p></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p>(Optional) If garbage collection is
enabled, causes periodic collection at the specified interval. Must be
set based on use cases and user workloads. If no value is specified,
there is no periodic collection. Requires the <code>gc</code> attribute
to be <code>true</code>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><code>subpaths</code></p></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p>You can store and serve images from
multiple filesystems, each with their own repository paths and settings.
The following example shows three subpaths.</p>
<div class="sourceCode" id="cb1"><pre
class="sourceCode json"><code class="sourceCode json"><span id="cb1-1"><a href="#cb1-1" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a><span class="er">&quot;storage&quot;:</span><span class="fu">{</span></span>
<span id="cb1-2"><a href="#cb1-2" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>  <span class="dt">&quot;subPaths&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="fu">{</span></span>
<span id="cb1-3"><a href="#cb1-3" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>    <span class="dt">&quot;/a&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="fu">{</span></span>
<span id="cb1-4"><a href="#cb1-4" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>      <span class="dt">&quot;rootDirectory&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="st">&quot;/tmp/zot1&quot;</span><span class="fu">,</span></span>
<span id="cb1-5"><a href="#cb1-5" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>      <span class="dt">&quot;dedupe&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="kw">true</span><span class="fu">,</span></span>
<span id="cb1-6"><a href="#cb1-6" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>      <span class="dt">&quot;gc&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="kw">true</span></span>
<span id="cb1-7"><a href="#cb1-7" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>    <span class="fu">},</span></span>
<span id="cb1-8"><a href="#cb1-8" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>    <span class="dt">&quot;/b&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="fu">{</span></span>
<span id="cb1-9"><a href="#cb1-9" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>      <span class="dt">&quot;rootDirectory&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="st">&quot;/tmp/zot2&quot;</span><span class="fu">,</span></span>
<span id="cb1-10"><a href="#cb1-10" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>      <span class="dt">&quot;dedupe&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="kw">true</span></span>
<span id="cb1-11"><a href="#cb1-11" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>    <span class="fu">},</span></span>
<span id="cb1-12"><a href="#cb1-12" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>    <span class="dt">&quot;/c&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="fu">{</span></span>
<span id="cb1-13"><a href="#cb1-13" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>      <span class="dt">&quot;rootDirectory&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="st">&quot;/tmp/zot3&quot;</span><span class="fu">,</span></span>
<span id="cb1-14"><a href="#cb1-14" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>      <span class="dt">&quot;dedupe&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="kw">false</span></span>
<span id="cb1-15"><a href="#cb1-15" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>    <span class="fu">}</span></span>
<span id="cb1-16"><a href="#cb1-16" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>  <span class="fu">}</span></span>
<span id="cb1-17"><a href="#cb1-17" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a><span class="fu">}</span></span></code></pre></div></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><code>storageDriver</code></p></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p>(Remote storage only) Contains settings for a remote storage service. See <a href="#config-s3"><i>Configuring remote storage with s3</i></a> for details.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><code>cacheDriver</code></p></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p>Specifies which database is used to store duplicate blobs when deduplication is enabled. See <a href="#config-cache"><i>Cache drivers</i></a> for details.</p></td></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


<a name="config-s3"></a>

## Configuring remote storage with s3

To configure an Amazon Simple Storage Service (s3) bucket for zot, use the `storageDriver` attribute in the zot configuration file, as shown in the following example:

``` json
    "storage": {
        "rootDirectory": "/tmp/zot",
        "storageDriver": {
            "name": "s3",
            "region": "us-east-2",
            "bucket": "zot-storage",
            "secure": true,
            "skipverify": false,
            "accesskey": "<YOUR_ACCESS_KEY_ID>",
            "secretkey": "<YOUR_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY>"
        }
    }
```

For descriptions of the configurable attributes for `storageDriver`, see the [s3 storage driver](https://github.com/docker/docker.github.io/blob/master/registry/storage-drivers/s3.md) project in GitHub.


### s3 Credentials

In the s3 configuration file example, the s3 credentials were configured with the attributes `accesskey` and `secretkey.` As an alternative, you can omit these attributes from the configuration file and you can configure them using environment variables or a credential file.

-   Environment variables

    zot looks for credentials in the following environment
    variables:

        AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID
        AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
        AWS_SESSION_TOKEN (optional)

-   Credential file

    A credential file is a plaintext file that contains your access
    keys, as shown in the following example.

        [default]
        aws_access_key_id = <YOUR_DEFAULT_ACCESS_KEY_ID>
        aws_secret_access_key = <YOUR_DEFAULT_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY>

        [test-account]
        aws_access_key_id = <YOUR_TEST_ACCESS_KEY_ID>
        aws_secret_access_key = <YOUR_TEST_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY>

        [prod-account]
        ; work profile
        aws_access_key_id = <YOUR_PROD_ACCESS_KEY_ID>
        aws_secret_access_key = <YOUR_PROD_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY>

    The `[default]` heading defines credentials for the default profile,
    which zot will use unless you configure it to use another
    profile. You can specify a profile using the `AWS_PROFILE`
    environment variable as in this example:

        AWS_PROFILE=test-account

    The credential file must be named `credentials.` The file must be
    located in the `.aws/` subdirectory in the home directory of the same
    server that is running your zot application.

For more details about specifying s3 credentials, see the [AWS documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sdk-for-go/v1/developer-guide/configuring-sdk.html#specifying-credentials).

### S3 permissions scopes

The following AWS policy is required by zot for push and pull. 

> :pencil2: Replace S3_BUCKET_NAME with the name of your s3 bucket.

```json
[AWS CONFIGURATION]
{
  "Version": "2012-10-17",
  "Statement": [
    {
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Action": [
        "s3:ListBucket",
        "s3:GetBucketLocation",
        "s3:ListBucketMultipartUploads"
      ],
      "Resource": "arn:aws:s3:::<S3_BUCKET_NAME>"
    },
    {
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Action": [
        "s3:PutObject",
        "s3:GetObject",
        "s3:DeleteObject",
        "s3:ListMultipartUploadParts",
        "s3:AbortMultipartUpload"
      ],
      "Resource": "arn:aws:s3:::<S3_BUCKET_NAME>/*"
    }
  ]
}
```

For more details about configuring AWS policies, see the [AWS documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/index.htmlhttps://docs.aws.amazon.com/index.html).

<a name="config-cache"></a>

## Cache drivers

A cache driver is used to store duplicate blobs when `dedupe` is enabled.  zot supports database caching using BoltDB as the cache driver for local filesystems and DynamoDB for remote filesystems.

### BoltDB

If you don't specify a cache driver, zot defaults to [BoltDB](https://dbdb.io/db/boltdb).  BoltDB is stored either in zot's root directory or in the subpath root directory.

```json
    "storage": {
        "rootDirectory": "/tmp/zot",
        "dedupe": true
    }
```

In this example, BoltDB can be found at /tmp/zot/cache.db.

### DynamoDB

To use [DynamoDB](https://aws.amazon.com/dynamodb/) as the cache driver, the following storage configuration must be present:

- `dedupe` is enabled
- `remoteCache` is enabled
- `cacheDriver` attribute is configured as in the following example:

```json
    "storage": {
        "rootDirectory": "/tmp/zot",
        "dedupe": true,
        "remoteCache": true,
        "cacheDriver": {
            "name": "dynamodb",                  // driver name
            "endpoint": "http://localhost:4566", // aws endpoint
            "region": "us-east-2"                // aws region
            "cacheTablename": "ZotBlobTable"     // table to store deduped blobs
        }
    },
```

The AWS GO SDK loads additional configuration and credentials values from your environment variables, shared credentials, and shared configuration files.

If the search extension is enabled, additional parameters are required:

```json
        "cacheDriver": {
            "name": "dynamodb",
            "endpoint": "http://localhost:4566",
            "region": "us-east-2",
            "cacheTablename": "ZotBlobTable",
            // used by search extensions
            "repoMetaTablename": "ZotRepoMetadataTable",
            "manifestDataTablename": "ZotManifestDataTable",
            "versionTablename": "ZotVersion"
        }
```

#### DynamoDB permission scopes

The following AWS policy is required by zot for caching blobs. 

> :pencil2: Replace DYNAMODB_TABLE with the name of your table, which should be the value of `cacheTablename` in the zot configuration.  
> 
> In this case, the AWS `Resource` value would be `arn:aws:dynamodb:*:*:table/ZotBlobTable`

```json
[AWS CONFIGURATION]
{
  "Version": "2012-10-17",
  "Statement": [
    {
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Action": [
        "dynamodb:CreateTable",
        "dynamodb:GetItem",
        "dynamodb:UpdateItem",
        "dynamodb:DeleteItem"
      ],
      "Resource": "arn:aws:dynamodb:*:*:table/<DYNAMODB_TABLE>"
    }
  ]
}
```

For more details about configuring AWS DynamoDB, see the [AWS documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/dynamodb/).

## Remote storage subpaths

As in the case with local filesystem storage, you can use multiple remote storage locations using the `subpath` attribute, as in the following example.

``` json
"subPaths": {
    "/a": {
        "rootDirectory": "/zot-a",
        "storageDriver": {
            "name": "s3",
            "region": "us-east-2",
            "bucket": "zot-storage",
            "secure": true,
            "skipverify": false
        }
    },
    "/b": {
       .
       .
       .
    }
}
```

The `subPaths` feature ties together several separate storage filesystems and backends behind the same HTTP API interface. In the example above, both repository paths "/a" and "/b" are exposed to clients. Content on these two paths can be hosted completely separately by different storage services, locations, or filesystems, with no difference to the user interface and no perceptible difference to the user experience. This is useful if one wants to serve existing OCI images from different backends or if storage can be expanded only by using different backing stores.

> :bulb: zot also supports different storage drivers for each subpath.

Commit message:

docs: added startup dedupe documenation
Signed-off-by: Petu Eusebiu <peusebiu@cisco.com>

docs/articles/storage.md, after:

# Storage Planning with zot

> :point_right: zot supports the following features to provide OCI standards-based, vendor-agnostic image storage:
>
> -   Local and remote file storage
> -   Inline deduplication and garbage collection
> -   Data scrubbing in background

## Storage model

Data handling in zot revolves around two main principles: that data and APIs on the wire conform to the OCI Distribution Specification and that data on the disk conforms to the OCI Image Layout Specification. As a result, any client that is compliant with the Distribution Specification can read from or write to a zot registry. Furthermore, the actual storage is simply an OCI Image Layout. With only these two specification documents in hand, the entire data flow inside can be easily understood.

> :pencil2:
> zot does not implement, support, or require any vendor-specific protocols, including that of Docker.

### Hosting an OCI image layout

Because zot supports the OCI image layout, it can readily host and serve any directories holding a valid OCI image layout even when those directories have been created elsewhere. This property of zot is suitable for use cases in which container images are independently built, stored, and transferred, but later need to be served over the network.

## Storage features 

Exposing flexibility in storage capabilities is a key tenet for catering to the requirements of varied environments ranging from cloud to on-premises to IoT.

#### Commit

Most modern filesystems buffer and flush RAM data to disk after a delay. The purpose of this function is to improve performance at the cost of higher disk memory usage. In embedded devices such as Raspberry Pi, for example, where RAM may be very limited and at a premium, it is desirable to flush data to disk more frequently. The zot storage configuration exposes an option called `commit` which, when enabled, causes data writes to be committed to disk immediately. This option is disabled by default.

#### Deduplication

Deduplication is a storage space saving feature wherein only a single copy of specific content is maintained on disk while many different image manifests may hold references to that same content. The deduplication option (`dedupe`) is also available for supported cloud storage backends.

Upon startup, zot enforces the `dedupe` status on the existing storage. If the `dedupe` status upon startup is `true`, zot deduplicates all blobs found in storage, both local and remote.  If the status upon startup is `false`, zot restores cloud storage blobs to their original state. There is no need for zot to restore local filesystem storage if hard links are used.

#### Garbage collection

After an image is deleted by deleting an image manifest, the corresponding blobs can be purged to free up space. However, since Distribution Specification APIs are not transactional between blob and manifest lifecycle, care must be taken so as not to put the storage in an inconsistent state. Garbage collection in zot is an inline feature meaning that it is **not** necessary to take the registry offline. The zot configuration model allows for enabling and disabling garbage collection (`gc`). The model also allows the configuration of a tunable delay (`gcDelay`), which can be set depending on client network speeds and the size of blobs.

#### Scrub

The `scrub` function, available as an *extension*, makes it possible to ascertain data validity by computing hashes on blobs periodically and continuously so that any bit rot is caught and reported early.

## Storage backends

The following types of storage backends are supported.

### Local filesystem

zot can store and serve files from one or more local directories. A minimum of one root directory is required for local hosting, but additional hosted directories can be added. When accessed by HTTP APIs, all directories can appear as a single data store.

> :pencil2:
> Remote filesystems that are mounted and accessible locally such as `NFS` or `fuse` are treated as local filesystems.


### Remote filesystem

zot can also store data remotely in the cloud, using the storage APIs of the cloud service. Currently, zot supports only the AWS s3 storage service.

#### Example: configuration for remote (s3) storage

<details>
  <summary markdown="span">Click here to view a sample zot configuration for remote storage.</summary>

```json

{
    "distSpecVersion": "1.0.1-dev",
    "storage": {
        "rootDirectory": "/tmp/zot",
        "dedupe": true,
        "storageDriver": {
            "name": "s3",
            "rootdirectory": "/zot",
            "region": "us-east-2",
            "bucket": "zot-storage",
            "secure": true,
            "skipverify": false
        },
        "cacheDriver": {
            "name": "dynamodb",
            "endpoint": "http://localhost:4566",
            "region": "us-east-2",
            "tableName": "MainTable"
        },
    },
    "http": {
        "address": "127.0.0.1",
        "port": "8080"
    },
    "log": {
        "level": "debug"
    }
}

```
</details>


## Configuring zot storage

Filesystem storage is configured with the `storage` attribute in the zot configuration file, as shown in the following example.

``` json
    "storage":{
        "rootDirectory":"/tmp/zot",
        "commit": true,
        "dedupe": true,
        "gc": true,
        "gcDelay": "1h",
        "gcInterval": "24h"
    }
```

### Configurable attributes


The following table lists the attributes of the `storage` configuration.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 75%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th style="text-align: left;">Attribute</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">Description</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><code>rootDirectory</code></p></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p>Location of the images stored in the
server file system.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><code>commit</code></p></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p>For faster performance, data written by
zot is retained in memory before being periodically committed
to disk by the operating system. To eliminate this retention time and
cause data to be written to disk immediately, set to <code>true</code>.
This prevents data loss but reduces performance.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><code>dedupe</code></p></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p>If the server filesystem supports hard
links, you can optimize storage space by enabling inline deduplication
of layers and blobs that are shared among multiple container images.
Deduplication is enabled by default. Set to <code>false</code> to
disable deduplication.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><code>gc</code></p></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p>When an image is deleted, either by tag
or by reference, orphaned blobs can lead to wasted storage. Garbage
collection (gc) is enabled by default to reclaim this space. Set to
<code>false</code> to disable garbage collection.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><code>gcDelay</code></p></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p>(Optional) If garbage collection is
enabled, causes it to run once after the specified delay time. The
default is 1 hour. Requires the <code>gc</code> attribute to be
<code>true</code>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><code>gcInterval</code></p></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p>(Optional) If garbage collection is
enabled, causes periodic collection at the specified interval. Must be
set based on use cases and user workloads. If no value is specified,
there is no periodic collection. Requires the <code>gc</code> attribute
to be <code>true</code>.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><code>subpaths</code></p></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p>You can store and serve images from
multiple filesystems, each with their own repository paths and settings.
The following example shows three subpaths.</p>
<div class="sourceCode" id="cb1"><pre
class="sourceCode json"><code class="sourceCode json"><span id="cb1-1"><a href="#cb1-1" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a><span class="er">&quot;storage&quot;:</span><span class="fu">{</span></span>
<span id="cb1-2"><a href="#cb1-2" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>  <span class="dt">&quot;subPaths&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="fu">{</span></span>
<span id="cb1-3"><a href="#cb1-3" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>    <span class="dt">&quot;/a&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="fu">{</span></span>
<span id="cb1-4"><a href="#cb1-4" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>      <span class="dt">&quot;rootDirectory&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="st">&quot;/tmp/zot1&quot;</span><span class="fu">,</span></span>
<span id="cb1-5"><a href="#cb1-5" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>      <span class="dt">&quot;dedupe&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="kw">true</span><span class="fu">,</span></span>
<span id="cb1-6"><a href="#cb1-6" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>      <span class="dt">&quot;gc&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="kw">true</span></span>
<span id="cb1-7"><a href="#cb1-7" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>    <span class="fu">},</span></span>
<span id="cb1-8"><a href="#cb1-8" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>    <span class="dt">&quot;/b&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="fu">{</span></span>
<span id="cb1-9"><a href="#cb1-9" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>      <span class="dt">&quot;rootDirectory&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="st">&quot;/tmp/zot2&quot;</span><span class="fu">,</span></span>
<span id="cb1-10"><a href="#cb1-10" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>      <span class="dt">&quot;dedupe&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="kw">true</span></span>
<span id="cb1-11"><a href="#cb1-11" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>    <span class="fu">},</span></span>
<span id="cb1-12"><a href="#cb1-12" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>    <span class="dt">&quot;/c&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="fu">{</span></span>
<span id="cb1-13"><a href="#cb1-13" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>      <span class="dt">&quot;rootDirectory&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="st">&quot;/tmp/zot3&quot;</span><span class="fu">,</span></span>
<span id="cb1-14"><a href="#cb1-14" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>      <span class="dt">&quot;dedupe&quot;</span><span class="fu">:</span> <span class="kw">false</span></span>
<span id="cb1-15"><a href="#cb1-15" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>    <span class="fu">}</span></span>
<span id="cb1-16"><a href="#cb1-16" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a>  <span class="fu">}</span></span>
<span id="cb1-17"><a href="#cb1-17" aria-hidden="true" tabindex="-1"></a><span class="fu">}</span></span></code></pre></div></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><code>storageDriver</code></p></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p>(Remote storage only) Contains settings for a remote storage service. See <a href="#config-s3"><i>Configuring remote storage with s3</i></a> for details.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td style="text-align: left;"><p><code>cacheDriver</code></p></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"><p>Specifies which database is used to store duplicate blobs when deduplication is enabled. See <a href="#config-cache"><i>Cache drivers</i></a> for details.</p></td></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


<a name="config-s3"></a>

## Configuring remote storage with s3

To configure an Amazon Simple Storage Service (s3) bucket for zot, use the `storageDriver` attribute in the zot configuration file, as shown in the following example:

``` json
    "storage": {
        "rootDirectory": "/tmp/zot",
        "storageDriver": {
            "name": "s3",
            "region": "us-east-2",
            "bucket": "zot-storage",
            "secure": true,
            "skipverify": false,
            "accesskey": "<YOUR_ACCESS_KEY_ID>",
            "secretkey": "<YOUR_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY>"
        }
    }
```

For descriptions of the configurable attributes for `storageDriver`, see the [s3 storage driver](https://github.com/docker/docker.github.io/blob/master/registry/storage-drivers/s3.md) project in GitHub.


### s3 Credentials

In the s3 configuration file example, the s3 credentials were configured with the attributes `accesskey` and `secretkey.` As an alternative, you can omit these attributes from the configuration file and you can configure them using environment variables or a credential file.

-   Environment variables

    zot looks for credentials in the following environment
    variables:

        AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID
        AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
        AWS_SESSION_TOKEN (optional)

-   Credential file

    A credential file is a plaintext file that contains your access
    keys, as shown in the following example.

        [default]
        aws_access_key_id = <YOUR_DEFAULT_ACCESS_KEY_ID>
        aws_secret_access_key = <YOUR_DEFAULT_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY>

        [test-account]
        aws_access_key_id = <YOUR_TEST_ACCESS_KEY_ID>
        aws_secret_access_key = <YOUR_TEST_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY>

        [prod-account]
        ; work profile
        aws_access_key_id = <YOUR_PROD_ACCESS_KEY_ID>
        aws_secret_access_key = <YOUR_PROD_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY>

    The `[default]` heading defines credentials for the default profile,
    which zot will use unless you configure it to use another
    profile. You can specify a profile using the `AWS_PROFILE`
    environment variable as in this example:

        AWS_PROFILE=test-account

    The credential file must be named `credentials.` The file must be
    located in the `.aws/` subdirectory in the home directory of the same
    server that is running your zot application.

For more details about specifying s3 credentials, see the [AWS documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sdk-for-go/v1/developer-guide/configuring-sdk.html#specifying-credentials).

### S3 permissions scopes

The following AWS policy is required by zot for push and pull. 

> :pencil2: Replace S3_BUCKET_NAME with the name of your s3 bucket.

```json
[AWS CONFIGURATION]
{
  "Version": "2012-10-17",
  "Statement": [
    {
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Action": [
        "s3:ListBucket",
        "s3:GetBucketLocation",
        "s3:ListBucketMultipartUploads"
      ],
      "Resource": "arn:aws:s3:::<S3_BUCKET_NAME>"
    },
    {
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Action": [
        "s3:PutObject",
        "s3:GetObject",
        "s3:DeleteObject",
        "s3:ListMultipartUploadParts",
        "s3:AbortMultipartUpload"
      ],
      "Resource": "arn:aws:s3:::<S3_BUCKET_NAME>/*"
    }
  ]
}
```

For more details about configuring AWS policies, see the [AWS documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/index.htmlhttps://docs.aws.amazon.com/index.html).

<a name="config-cache"></a>

## Cache drivers

A cache driver is used to store duplicate blobs when `dedupe` is enabled.  zot supports database caching using BoltDB as the cache driver for local filesystems and DynamoDB for remote filesystems.

### BoltDB

If you don't specify a cache driver, zot defaults to [BoltDB](https://dbdb.io/db/boltdb).  BoltDB is stored either in zot's root directory or in the subpath root directory.

```json
    "storage": {
        "rootDirectory": "/tmp/zot",
        "dedupe": true
    }
```

In this example, BoltDB can be found at /tmp/zot/cache.db.

### DynamoDB

To use [DynamoDB](https://aws.amazon.com/dynamodb/) as the cache driver, the following storage configuration must be present:

- `dedupe` is enabled
- `remoteCache` is enabled
- `cacheDriver` attribute is configured as in the following example:

```json
    "storage": {
        "rootDirectory": "/tmp/zot",
        "dedupe": true,
        "remoteCache": true,
        "cacheDriver": {
            "name": "dynamodb",                  // driver name
            "endpoint": "http://localhost:4566", // aws endpoint
            "region": "us-east-2"                // aws region
            "cacheTablename": "ZotBlobTable"     // table to store deduped blobs
        }
    },
```

The AWS GO SDK loads additional configuration and credentials values from your environment variables, shared credentials, and shared configuration files.

If the search extension is enabled, additional parameters are required:

```json
        "cacheDriver": {
            "name": "dynamodb",
            "endpoint": "http://localhost:4566",
            "region": "us-east-2",
            "cacheTablename": "ZotBlobTable",
            // used by search extensions
            "repoMetaTablename": "ZotRepoMetadataTable",
            "manifestDataTablename": "ZotManifestDataTable",
            "versionTablename": "ZotVersion"
        }
```

#### DynamoDB permission scopes

The following AWS policy is required by zot for caching blobs. 

> :pencil2: Replace DYNAMODB_TABLE with the name of your table, which should be the value of `cacheTablename` in the zot configuration.  
> 
> In this case, the AWS `Resource` value would be `arn:aws:dynamodb:*:*:table/ZotBlobTable`

```json
[AWS CONFIGURATION]
{
  "Version": "2012-10-17",
  "Statement": [
    {
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Action": [
        "dynamodb:CreateTable",
        "dynamodb:GetItem",
        "dynamodb:UpdateItem",
        "dynamodb:DeleteItem"
      ],
      "Resource": "arn:aws:dynamodb:*:*:table/<DYNAMODB_TABLE>"
    }
  ]
}
```

For more details about configuring AWS DynamoDB, see the [AWS documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/dynamodb/).

## Remote storage subpaths

As in the case with local filesystem storage, you can use multiple remote storage locations using the `subpath` attribute, as in the following example.

``` json
"subPaths": {
    "/a": {
        "rootDirectory": "/zot-a",
        "storageDriver": {
            "name": "s3",
            "region": "us-east-2",
            "bucket": "zot-storage",
            "secure": true,
            "skipverify": false
        }
    },
    "/b": {
       .
       .
       .
    }
}
```

The `subPaths` feature ties together several separate storage filesystems and backends behind the same HTTP API interface. In the example above, both repository paths "/a" and "/b" are exposed to clients. Content on these two paths can be hosted completely separately by different storage services, locations, or filesystems, with no difference to the user interface and no perceptible difference to the user experience. This is useful if one wants to serve existing OCI images from different backends or if storage can be expanded only by using different backing stores.

> :bulb: zot also supports different storage drivers for each subpath.
